Feelings of emotional distress such as anxiety and depression are becoming increasingly prevalent in modern society. Without the proper resources, these feelings can escalate to unhealthy coping mechanisms such as self-harm and suicidal ideation. With the increased use of online communication, some people may choose to express their feelings within online platforms with the purpose of seeking help. However, in using this approach, a user may not receive relevant support or mental health resources. The purpose of this project was to create a solution to this problem: EzerBot – an intelligent chatbot. EzerBot uses a neural network to detect instances of emotional distress within online platforms. It was trained with data samples from two social media platforms: Reddit and Twitter. Each sample was manually labeled as ‘1’ to indicate emotional distress or ‘0’ for other. Upon detection, EzerBot was programmed to engage the user in a conversation and offer them relevant resources in their vicinity using Yelp’s API. EzerBot’s efficiency and its ability to conduct a conversation was tested with human participants. Participants rated EzerBot highly and the feedback was positive. To determine the efficacy of the neural network, the model was tested with a test set. It was found to have an accuracy of about 88% and a precision and recall of approximately 0.85 and 0.92, respectively. This establishes EzerBot as a functional tool for mental health support and a preventative measure for self-harm and suicide within online platforms.
